Add documentation for deadlock analysis (#446)
iotaledger/stronghold.rs: documentation/docs/explanations/deadlock-analysis.mdx

---

> description: Learn how Stronghold was analysed to prevent any deadlock from occuring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how Stronghold was analyzed to prevent deadlocks from happening.
```

image: /img/logo/Stronghold_icon.png
keywords:
- concurrency
- deadlock

> - locks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- locks
- explanation
 ```

---

> # Deadlock analysis for Stronghold

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Deadlock Analysis in Stronghold
```

Current Stronghold use `RwLock` to enable [concurrency](./concurrency.md).
This approach has the pros of being simple in theory and has fast performance when done right. The downside is that in practice it is usually really difficult to use locks in concurrent programming and you often encounter _data races_ or _deadlocks_ when using them.
One of the worst case would to have a deadlock in Stronghold which would have the consequences to block Stronghold and not being able to use it.

> To avoid such situation a deadlock analysis has been used which we present here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stronghold uses `RwLock` to enable [concurrency](./concurrency.md).
This approach has the pros of being simple in theory and fast performance when done right. The downside is that, in practice, it is usually really difficult to use locks in concurrent programming, and you often encounter _data races_ or _deadlocks_ when using them.
One of the worst cases would be to have a deadlock in Stronghold, which could block Stronghold and render it unusable.
To avoid this situation, Stronghold uses deadlock analysis.
```

## Requirements for multithreaded Strongold
- Be able to clone the elements parts of the API and use them concurrently. Types reachable through the API that may be cloned and shared between threads 
  - `Stronghold`
  - `Client`

>   - `Store`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Requirements for a Multithreaded Stronghold

- Be able to clone the element type parts of the API and use them concurrently. The following types ar reachable through the API and may be cloned and shared between threads:
  - [Stronghold](../reference/structure/overview)
  - [Client](../reference/structure/client.md)
  - [Store](../references/enginge/store.md)
```

- Use `Mutex` or `RWLock`

> - Argument on the impossibility of deadlocks

Reviewer: I think this may be a placeholder, or perhaps there's something I'm not understanding

## Analysis of deadlocks

> This is internal thoughts stemming from experience but does not have peer-reviewed paper backing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Deadlocks Analysis

:::note

These are thoughts stemming from experience, but they __do not have a peer-reviewed paper backing them__.

:::
```

> ### Model
> Locks are used to control access to shared memory.
> To simplify the problem we only model mutex so that only a single thread
> can access to a shared memory.
> 
> #### Model of function and locks
> Here how we represent a function and locks.
> 
> ![](./assets/function_model.drawio.png)
> 
> - $1$, $2$, $3$ represent locks that protect 3 different and distinct shared memory locations
> - $f_1$ is a function that sequentially takes hold of lock $1$ then $2$ then $3$
> - $f_1$ releases the locks $1$, $2$, $3$ at the end of its computation 
> 
> Here we can see that lock $2$ depends on lock $1$ because in $f_1$ you can't take lock $2$ before taking lock $1$. In the same way lock $3$ depends on locks $1$ and $2$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Model

Locks are used for controlling access to shared memory.
To simplify the problem, we only model mutex so that only a single thread can access shared memory.

#### Model of functions and locks

![How functions and locks are represented in Stronghold](./assets/function_model.drawio.png)

- $1$, $2$, $3$ represent locks that protect 3 different and distinct shared memory locations.
- $f_1$ is a function that sequentially takes hold of lock $1$ then $2$ then $3$.
- $f_1$ releases the locks $1$, $2$, $3$ at the end of its computation.

Note that lock $2$ depends on lock $1$, because in $f_1$ you can't take lock $2$ before taking lock $1$. In the same way, lock $3$ depends on locks $1$ and $2$.

```

> #### Example: Deadlock with 2 functions
> Here is an example of the most simple possible deadlock.
> 
> ![](assets/deadlock_2_functions.drawio.png)
> 
> - the function $f_1$ wants to take the locks for shared memory $1$ then $2$
> - the function $f_2$ wants to take the locks for shared memory $2$ then $1$
> - on the right you can see that there is a circular dependency of locks between $f_1$ and $f_2$ (you can do a circle by following the arrows of $f_1$ and $f_2$). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: Deadlock with 2 functions

The following is an example of the most simple possible deadlock.

![Simple deadlock](assets/deadlock_2_functions.drawio.png)

- The function $f_1$ wants to take the locks for shared memory $1$, then $2$.
- The function $f_2$ wants to take the locks for shared memory $2$, then $1$.
- On the right, you can see a circular lock dependency between $f_1$ and $f_2$. This means that you can do a circle by following the arrows of $f_1$ and $f_2$.
```

##### Analysis

> The graph at the right represents the merged dependency graph of functions $f_1$ and $f_2$. It shows all the dependencies of the locks in $f_1$ and $f_2$.
> The presence of a circular dependency on the merged graph indicates the possibility of a deadlock when executing $f_1$ and $f_2$ concurrently.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The graph at the right represents the merged dependency graph of functions $f_1$ and $f_2$. It shows all the dependencies of the locks in $f_1$ and $f_2$.
A circular dependency on the merged graph indicates the possibility of a deadlock when executing $f_1$ and $f_2$ concurrently.

```

> ##### Example run resulting in a deadlock: 
> 1. $f_1$ starts and takes the lock $1$
> 2. $f_2$ starts and takes the lock $2$
> 3. $f_1$ is stuck because $f_2$ is holding the lock $2$ that it requires
> 4. $f_2$ is stuck because $f_2$ is holding the lock $1$ that it requires

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Example run resulting in a deadlock 

1. $f_1$ starts and takes the lock $1$.
2. $f_2$ starts and takes the lock $2$.
3. $f_1$ is stuck, because $f_2$ is holding the lock $2$ that it requires.
4. $f_2$ is stuck, because $f_2$ is holding the lock $1$ that it requires.
```

> 
> 
> #### Example: Deadlock with 3 functions
> ![](assets/deadlock_3_functions.drawio.png)
> 
> As the previous example there is a circular dependency of locks 
> between $f_1$, $f_2$ and $f_3$. 
> Example run resulting in a deadlock: 
> 1. $f_1$ starts and takes the lock $1$
> 2. $f_2$ starts and takes the lock $3$
> 3. $f_3$ starts and takes the lock $2$
> 4. $f_1$ is stuck because $f_3$ is holding the lock $2$ that it requires
> 5. $f_2$ is stuck because $f_1$ is holding the lock $1$ that it requires
> 6. $f_3$ is stuck because $f_2$ is holding the lock $3$ that it requires
> 
> ### Proof backing "_no circular dependency equals to no deadlock_"
> This is a proof on an example for simplicity. The reasoning used in the next part can be applied to any dependency graph of locks to prove the absence of deadlock when there are no circular dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: Deadlock with 3 functions

![Three function deadlock](assets/deadlock_3_functions.drawio.png)

In the [previous example](#model-of-functions-and-locks), we showed that there is a circular dependency of locks
between $f_1$, $f_2$ and $f_3$.

##### Example run resulting in a deadlock

1. $f_1$ starts and takes the lock $1$.
2. $f_2$ starts and takes the lock $3$.
3. $f_3$ starts and takes the lock $2$.
4. $f_1$ is stuck, because $f_3$ is holding the lock $2$ that it requires.
5. $f_2$ is stuck, because $f_1$ is holding the lock $1$ that it requires.
6. $f_3$ is stuck, because $f_2$ is holding the lock $3$ that it requires.

### Proof backing "_no circular dependency equals no deadlock_"

This is a proof on an example for simplicity. You can apply the reasoning in the next part to any dependency graph of locks to prove the absence of a deadlock when there are no circular dependencies.
```

> #### Example: no deadlock
> ![](assets/no_deadlock.drawio.png)
> 
> There is no circular dependency in the right-side representation.
> We will try to argue that there is indeed no possible deadlock in this configuration.
> The main idea linking absence of deadlock with absence of circular dependency is that any thread will always eventually get the lock it's waiting for. Thus it will eventually terminate its computation thus releasing the locks it acquired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: no deadlock

![No deadlock](assets/no_deadlock.drawio.png)

There is no circular dependency in the right-side representation.
We will try to argue that there is indeed no possible deadlock in this configuration.
The main idea linking absence of deadlock with absence of circular dependency is that any thread will always eventually get the lock it's waiting for. So, it will eventually terminate its computation thus releasing the locks it acquired.
```

##### Definition: deadlock-free lock

> We say a lock is deadlock-free when we can prove that it will never part of a deadlock and will always eventually be released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

A lock is deadlock-free when we can prove that it will never be part of a deadlock and will always eventually be released.
```

> #### Proof of the absence of deadlock using the merged graph
> 
> 1. __Lock $3$ is deadlock-free__. No locks depend on lock $3$. When a thread acquires lock $3$ it will manage to terminate its computation and will always release it
> 2. __Recursively lock $2$ is deadlock-free__. Lock $2$ has only lock $3$ which depends on it. That means:
>   a) if a thread acquires lock $2$ it will eventually get lock $3$ because lock $3$ is deadlock-free (lock $3$ will always be available at some point)
>   b) if a thread acquires lock $2$ it will manage to terminate its computation and eventually be released because lock $3$ is deadlock-free
>   c) lock $2$ is deadlock-free by recursivity
> 3. __Recursively lock $1$ is deadlock-free__. All the locks that depend on lock $1$ are deadlock-free. Reasoning for lock $2$ can be also applied to lock $1$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Prove the absence of deadlock using the merged graph

1. __Lock $3$ is deadlock-free__. No locks depend on lock $3$. When a thread acquires lock $3$ it will manage to terminate its computation and will always release it.
2. __Recursively lock $2$ is deadlock-free__. Lock $3$ is the only lock that depends on lock $2$. That means:
    1. If a thread acquires lock $2$, it will eventually get lock $3$ because lock $3$ is deadlock-free (lock $3$ will always be available at some point).
    2. If a thread acquires lock $2$, it will manage to terminate its computation and eventually be released because lock $3$ is deadlock-free.
    3. Lock $2$ is deadlock-free by recursivity.
3. __Recursively, lock $1$ is deadlock-free__. All the locks that depend on lock $1$ are deadlock-free. You can apply the same reasoning for lock $2$ to lock $1$.
```

> ## Stronghold deadlock analysis
> The goal is to list the functions of Stronghold that access locks and build a merge graph. Then we show that the merge graph does not contain any circular dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Stronghold Deadlock Analysis

The goal is to list Stronghold's functions that access locks and build a merge graph. Then, we show that the merge graph does not contain circular dependencies.
```

 
### Stronghold shared memories
Here we list the different shared memory locations that are protected behind locks.

> Each shared memory location/lock is associated to a number that will be used for the dependency graph we describe after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stronghold Share Memories

This list shows the different shared memory locations that are protected behind locks.
Each shared memory location/lock is associated with a number that we will use for the dependency graph that follows.
```

> #### Fields of the `Stronghold` type which are shared memories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fields of the `Stronghold` type which are shared memories

```

1. snapshot: `Snapshot`
2. clients: `HashMap<ClientId, Client>`
3. store: `Store`
4. key_location: `Option<Location>`

> #### Fields of the `Client` type which are shared memories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fields of the `Client` type which are shared memories

```

5. keystore: `KeyStore`
6. db: `DbView` 
7. store: `Store`

> ### Stronghold functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stronghold Functions

```

Doing one dependency graph per function would be too complicated. Rather we list every function that access the shared memories listed above.

> After the function name, we describe the locks that are acquired or the functions that they call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating one dependency graph per function would be too complicated. Instead, we list every function that accesses the [shared memories](#stronghold-shared-memories).
After the function name, we describe the locks that are acquired or the functions that they call.
```

> #### Functions of the `Stronghold` type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Functions of the `Stronghold` type

```

- reset: 
- store:
- load_client_from_snapshot: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ `client`.restore() 
- load_client: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ `client`.restore() 
- get_client: 2
- unload_client: 2
- purge_client: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2
- load_snapshot: 1 
- store_snapshot_key_at_location: 1 $\rightarrow$ 4
- create_client: 2 
- commit_with_keyprovider: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ 5 $\rightarrow$ 6 $\rightarrow$ 7
- commit: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ 5 $\rightarrow$ 6 $\rightarrow$ 7
- write_client: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ 5 $\rightarrow$ 6 $\rightarrow$ 7 
- clear: 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ 3 $\rightarrow$ 4 $\rightarrow$  `client`.clear()

> #### Functions of the `Client` type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Functions of the `Client` type

```

- id: 
- restore: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6 $\rightarrow$ 7
- clear: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6 $\rightarrow$ 7
- execute_procedure: execute_procedure_chained()
- execute_procedure_chained: exec_proc()
- get_db: 6
- get_key_provider: 5
- `Runner` trait 
  - get_guards: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6 
  - exec_proc: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6
  - write_to_vault: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6
  - revoke_data: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6
  - garbage_collect: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6
  - resolve_locations: 5
  - get_guard: 5 $\rightarrow$ 6
- `SyncClients` trait
  - get_hierarchy: get_key_provider() $\rightarrow$  get_db()
  - get_diff: get_key_provider() $\rightarrow$  get_db()
  - export_entries: get_db()

 
### Stronghold merged graph
This is done by merging all the lock dependencies from the functions listed [above](#stronghold-functions).

![](./assets/stronghold_merged_graph.drawio.png)

We can easily see that there are no circular dependency in this graph. 

## Conclusion
This document gives us more guarantee on the absence of deadlocks in our multithreaded implementation of Stronghold.

> However the theory presented has not been proved correct (to our knowledge). Moreover the creation of the merged graph is not exempt from human error either. This is not a proof of the absence of deadlocks but an argument and a view on how we designed Stronghold to avoid such situation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stronghold Merged Graph

This was created by merging all the lock dependencies from the [Stronghold functions](#stronghold-functions).

![Merged Stronghold Graph](./assets/stronghold_merged_graph.drawio.png)

You can easily see that there are no circular dependencies in this graph.

## Conclusion

This document reassures us of the absence of deadlocks in our multithreaded implementation of Stronghold.

However, the theory presented has not been proven correct to our knowledge. Moreover, creating the merged graph is not exempt from human error either. **This is not proof of the absence of deadlocks**, but an argument and a view on how we designed Stronghold to avoid such a situation.

```

---
description: Learn how Stronghold was analyzed to prevent deadlocks from happening.
image: /img/logo/Stronghold_icon.png
keywords:
- concurrency
- deadlock
- locks
- explanation
---

# Deadlock analysis for Stronghold

Current Stronghold use `RwLock` to enable [concurrency](./concurrency.md).
This approach has the pros of being simple in theory and has fast performance when done right. The downside is that in practice it is usually really difficult to use locks in concurrent programming and you often encounter _data races_ or _deadlocks_ when using them.
One of the worst case would to have a deadlock in Stronghold which would have the consequences to block Stronghold and not being able to use it.
To avoid such situation a deadlock analysis has been used which we present here.

## Requirements for multithreaded Strongold
- Be able to clone the elements parts of the API and use them concurrently. Types reachable through the API that may be cloned and shared between threads 
  - `Stronghold`
  - `Client`
  - `Store`
- Use `Mutex` or `RWLock`

> - Argument on the impossibility of deadlocks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---
description: Learn how Stronghold was analyzed to prevent deadlocks from happening.
image: /img/logo/Stronghold_icon.png
keywords:
- concurrency
- deadlock
- locks
- explanation
---

# Deadlock Analysis in Stronghold

Stronghold uses `RwLock` to enable [concurrency](./concurrency.md).
This approach has the pros of being simple in theory and fast performance when done right. The downside is that, in practice, it is usually really difficult to use locks in concurrent programming, and you often encounter _data races_ or _deadlocks_ when using them.
One of the worst cases would be to have a deadlock in Stronghold, which could block Stronghold and render it unusable.
To avoid this situation, Stronghold uses deadlock analysis.

### Requirements for a Multithreaded Stronghold

- Be able to clone the element type parts of the API and use them concurrently. The following types ar reachable through the API and may be cloned and shared between threads:
  - [Stronghold](../reference/structure/overview)
  - [Client](../reference/structure/client.md)

>   - [Store](../references/enginge/store.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [Store](../references/engine/store.md)
```
